sql: add the date & time types doc (#909)
pingcap/docs: sql/date-and-time-types.md

---
title: date and time types
category: user guide
---

# Date and time types

The values used to represent date and time types are DATE, TIME, DATETIME, TIMESTAMP, and YEAR. Each of these types has its own range of valid values, and uses a zero value to indicate that it is an invalid value. The TIMESTAMP has an behavior of automatic update, which will be introduced later.

When dealing with date and time value types, please be noted: 

+ Although TiDB tries to parse different formats, the date part must be in the format of year-month-day (for example, '98-09-04'), rather than month-day-year or day-month-year.
+ Ambiguity occurs when the year contained in the date value is in 2 digits. Then TiDB converts the value based on the following rules:
  - Value between 70 and 99 is converted to a value between 1970 and 1999
  - Value between 00 and 69 is converted to a value between 2000 and 2069

> + If a numberic value is needed in the context, TiDB automatically converts the date or time value into a numeric type.

Reviewer: ```
mysql> SELECT NOW(), NOW()+0, NOW(3)+0;
+---------------------+----------------+--------------------+
| NOW()               | NOW()+0        | NOW(3)+0           |
+---------------------+----------------+--------------------+
| 2012-08-15 09:28:00 | 20120815092800 | 20120815092800.889 |
+---------------------+----------------+--------------------+
```

> + If TiDB encounters a date or time value that is beyond the representation range, or is invalid, it automatically converts the value to a zero value of that type.

Reviewer: ```
mysql> set @@sql_mode = 'ONLY_FULL_GROUP_BY,NO_ZERO_DATE,ERROR_FOR_DIVISION_BY_ZERO,NO_AUTO_CREATE_USER,NO_ENGINE_SUBSTITUTION';                                                                                          
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

mysql> show create table t1;
+-------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Table | Create Table                                                                                            |
+-------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| t1    | CREATE TABLE `t1` (
  `a` time DEFAULT NULL
) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin |
+-------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)

mysql> insert into t1 values ('2090-11-32:22:33:44');
Query OK, 1 row affected, 1 warning (0.00 sec)

mysql> select * from t1;
+----------+
| a        |
+----------+
| 00:00:00 |
+----------+
1 row in set (0.00 sec)
```

Invalid YEAR value is automatically converted to 0000. 

## Automatic initialization and update of TIMESTAMP and DATETIME

Columns with TIMESTAMP or DATETIME value type can be automatically initialized or updated to the current time.

For any column with TIMESTAMP or DATETIME value type in the table, you can set the default or auto-update value as current timestamp. 

These properties can be set by setting `DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` and `ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` when the column is being defined. DEFAULT can also be set as a specific value, such as `DEFAULT 0` or `DEFAULT '2000-01-01 00:00:00'` .

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
  ts TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
  dt DATETIME DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);
```

The default value for DATETIME is `NULL` unless it is specified as `NOT NULL`. For the latter situation, if no default value is set, the default value will be 0.

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
  dt1 DATETIME ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,         -- default NULL
  dt2 DATETIME NOT NULL ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP -- default 0
);
```

## Decimal part of time value

> Decimal part is allowed in TIME, DATETIME, TIMESTAMP value types. The decimal can be accurate to milliseconds.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A decimal part is permitted for `TIME`, `DATETIME`, `TIMESTAMP` types. The decimal can be accurate to milliseconds.
```

  ```sql
  mysql> set @@sql_mode = '';                               
  Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

  mysql> show create table t1;
  +-------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Table | Create Table                                                                                            |
  +-------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | t1    | CREATE TABLE `t1` (
    `a` time DEFAULT NULL
  ) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin |
  +-------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  1 row in set (0.00 sec)
  
  mysql> insert into t1 values ('2090-11-32:22:33:44');
  Query OK, 1 row affected, 1 warning (0.00 sec)
  
  mysql> select * from t1;
  +----------+
  | a        |
  +----------+
  | 00:00:00 |
  +----------+
  1 row in set (0.00 sec)
  ```

+ Setting different SQL modes can change TiDB behaviors.

> + TiDB allows month or day in the columns of `DATE` and `DATETIME` to be zero value, for example, '2009-00-00' or '2009-01-00'. If this date type is to be calculated in a function, for example, in `DATE_SUB()` or `DATE_ADD()`, the result can be incorrect. 

Reviewer 2: iirc, this one is also sql mode dependent (`NO_ZERO_IN_DATE`).  The description should suggest that it is not possible by default.

> + TiDB allows zero value '0000-00-00' to be stored. Sometimes '0000-00-00' is more convenient for users than NULL value if they are not using the `NO_ZERO_DATE` SQL mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ By default, TiDB enables the SQL mode `NO_ZERO_DATE`. This mode prevents storing zero values such as '0000-00-00'.
```
I think we will receive criticism from standards geeks if we say '0000-00-00' is more convenient :-)  This is similar to saying "sometimes lying is more convenient than the truth".

---

> title: date and time types

Reviewer 3: Please keep your title capitalization consistent with other files.

> summary: learn about the TiDB-supported date and time types 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
summary: Learn about the TiDB-supported date and time types.
```

category: user guide
---

> # Date and time types

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Date and Time Types
```

Reviewer 3: Please pay attention to the details.

TiDB supports the following data types to store temporal values: `DATE`, `TIME`, `DATETIME`, `TIMESTAMP`, and `YEAR`. Each of these types has its own range of valid values, and uses a zero value to indicate that it is an invalid value. In addition, the `TIMESTAMP` and `DATETIME` types can automatically generate new time values on modification.

When dealing with date and time value types, note: 

+ Although TiDB tries to interpret different formats, the date-portion must be in the format of year-month-day (for example, '1998-09-04'), rather than month-day-year or day-month-year.

> + If the year-portion of a date is specified as 2 digits, TiDB converts it based on rules which will be specified in the later section of this document ( "Two-digit year-portion contained in the date" ) .

Reviewer 2: Can we use an anchor link instead?  I think the following will work:
```suggestion
+ If the year-portion of a date is specified as 2 digits, TiDB converts it based on [specific rules](#two-digit-year-portion-contained-in-the-date).
```

> + If a numeric value is needed in the context, TiDB automatically converts the date or time value into a numeric type. For example,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ If a numeric value is needed in the context, TiDB automatically converts the date or time value into a numeric type. For example:
```

    ```sql
    mysql> SELECT NOW(), NOW()+0, NOW(3)+0;
    +---------------------+----------------+--------------------+
    | NOW()               | NOW()+0        | NOW(3)+0           |
    +---------------------+----------------+--------------------+
    | 2012-08-15 09:28:00 | 20120815092800 | 20120815092800.889 |
    +---------------------+----------------+--------------------+
    ```
  

> + TiDB might automatically convert invalid values or values beyond the supported range to a zero value of that type. This behavior is dependent on the SQL Mode set. For example,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ TiDB might automatically convert invalid values or values beyond the supported range to a zero value of that type. This behavior is dependent on the SQL Mode set. For example:
```

+ `TIMESTAMP` contains both date-portion and time-portion. Its values range from '1970-01-01 00:00:01' to '2038-01-19 03:14:07' in UTC time.

`DATETIME` and `TIMESTAMP` values can contain a fractional part of up to 6 digits which is accurate to milliseconds. In any column of `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP` types, a fractional part is stored instead of being discarded. With a fractional part, the value is in the format of 'YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS[.fraction]', and the fraction ranges from 000000 to 999999. A decimal point must be used to separate the fraction from the rest.

When `TIMESTAMP` is to be stored, TiDB converts the `TIMESTAMP` value from the current time zone to UTC time zone. When `TIMESTAMP`  is to be retrieved, TiDB converts the stored `TIMESTAMP` value from UTC time zone to the current time zone (Note: `DATETIME` is not handled in this way). The default time zone for each connection is the server's local time zone, which can be modified by the environment variable `time_zone` .

Invalid `DATE`, `DATETIME`, `TIMESTAMP` values are automatically converted to the corresponding type of zero value ( '0000-00-00' or '0000-00-00 00:00:00' ). 

> **Note**: In `TIMESTAMP`, zero is not permitted to appear in the month-portion or day-portion. The only exception is zero value itself '0000-00-00 00:00:00'.

Reviewer 3: Keep the Note format consistent with that in other documents.

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
    ts TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
    dt DATETIME DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);
```

The default value for `DATETIME` is `NULL` unless it is specified as `NOT NULL`. For the latter situation, if no default value is set, the default value is be 0.

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
    dt1 DATETIME ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,         -- default NULL
    dt2 DATETIME NOT NULL ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP -- default 0
);
```

## Decimal part of time value

A decimal part is permitted for `TIME`, `DATETIME`, `TIMESTAMP` types. The decimal can be accurate to milliseconds.

+ Use `type_name(fsp)` to define a column that supports fractional precision, where `type_name` can be `TIME`, `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP`. For example,

    ```sql
    CREATE TABLE t1 (t TIME(3), dt DATETIME(6));
    ```

  `fsp` must range from 0 to 6. 

  `0` means there is no fractional part. If `fsp` is omitted, the default is 0.

> + When inserting `TIME`, `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP` which contain a fractional part, if the number of digit of the fraction is too few, or too many, rounding might be needed in the situation. For example,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ When inserting `TIME`, `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP` which contain a fractional part, if the number of digit of the fraction is too few, or too many, rounding might be needed in the situation. For example:
```

The conversions of `DATE`:

+ When `DATE` is converted to `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP`, a time-portion '00:00:00' is added, because DATE does not contain any time information
+ When `DATE` is converted to `TIME`, the result is '00:00:00'

Conversions of `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP`:

+ When `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP` is converted to `DATE`, the time and fractional part is discarded. For example, '1999-12-31 23:59:59.499' is converted to '1999-12-31'
+ When `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP` is converted to TIME, the time-portion is discarded, because `TIME` does not contain any time information

When we convert `TIME` to other time and date formats, the date-portion is automatically specified as `CURRENT_DATE()`. The final converted result is a date that consists of `TIME` and `CURRENT_DATE()`. This is to say that if the value of TIME is beyond the range from '00:00:00' to '23:59:59', the converted date-portion does not indicate the current day.

When `TIME` is converted to `DATE`, the process is similar, and the time-portion is discarded.

> Using the `CAST()` function can explicitly convert a value to a `DATE` type. For example,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using the `CAST()` function can explicitly convert a value to a `DATE` type. For example:
```

```sql
date_col = CAST(datetime_col AS DATE)
```

> Converting `TIME` and `DATETIME` to numeric format. For example,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Converting `TIME` and `DATETIME` to numeric format. For example:
```

```sql
mysql> SELECT CURTIME(), CURTIME()+0, CURTIME(3)+0;
+-----------|-------------|--------------+
| CURTIME() | CURTIME()+0 | CURTIME(3)+0 |
+-----------|-------------|--------------+
| 09:28:00  |       92800 |    92800.887 |
+-----------|-------------|--------------+
mysql> SELECT NOW(), NOW()+0, NOW(3)+0;
+---------------------|----------------|--------------------+
| NOW()               | NOW()+0        | NOW(3)+0           |
+---------------------|----------------|--------------------+
| 2012-08-15 09:28:00 | 20120815092800 | 20120815092800.889 |
+---------------------|----------------|--------------------+
```

## Two-digit year-portion contained in the date

The two-digit year-portion contained in date does not explicitly indicate the actual year and is ambiguous. 

> For `DATETIME`, `DATE` and `TIMESTAMP` types, TiDB follows these rules to eliminate ambiguity: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For `DATETIME`, `DATE` and `TIMESTAMP` types, TiDB follows the following rules to eliminate ambiguity: 
```

- Values between 00 and 69 is converted to a value between 2000 and 2069
- Values between 70 and 99 is converted to a value between 1970 and 1999

These rules also apply to the `YEAR` type, with one exception:

When numeral `00` is inserted to `YEAR(4)`, the result is 0000 rather than 2000. 

> If you want the result to be 2000, specify value to be 2000, '0' or '00'.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want the result to be 2000, specify the value to be 2000, '0' or '00'.
```

> When numeral 00 is inserted to YEAR(4), the result is 0000 rather than 2000. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When numeral `00` is inserted to `YEAR(4)`, the result is 0000 rather than 2000. 
```

> If you want the result to be 2000, you should specify value to be 2000, '0' or '00'.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you want the result to be 2000, specify the value to be 2000, '0' or '00'.
```

---
title: date and time types

> category: user guide

Reviewer 3: Please refer to other English documents and add a **summary** after the title line.

---

# Date and time types

TiDB supports the following data types to store temporal values: `DATE`, `TIME`, `DATETIME`, `TIMESTAMP`, and `YEAR`. Each of these types has its own range of valid values, and uses a zero value to indicate that it is an invalid value. In addition, the `TIMESTAMP` and `DATETIME` types can automatically generate new time values on modification.

> When dealing with date and time value types, please note: 

Reviewer 3: Limit the use of the word "please" in the documentation, which is over-polite.

+ Although TiDB tries to interpret different formats, the date-portion must be in the format of year-month-day (for example, '1998-09-04'), rather than month-day-year or day-month-year.
+ If the year-portion of a date is specified as 2 digits, TiDB converts it based on the following rules:
  - Values between 70 and 99 is converted to a value between 1970 and 1999
  - Values between 00 and 69 is converted to a value between 2000 and 2069
+ If a numberic value is needed in the context, TiDB automatically converts the date or time value into a numeric type. For example,

>   ```sql

Reviewer 3: Please indent the code block with four spaces, to avoid possible display errors on the PingCAP website.

  mysql> SELECT NOW(), NOW()+0, NOW(3)+0;
  +---------------------+----------------+--------------------+
  | NOW()               | NOW()+0        | NOW(3)+0           |
  +---------------------+----------------+--------------------+
  | 2012-08-15 09:28:00 | 20120815092800 | 20120815092800.889 |
  +---------------------+----------------+--------------------+
  ```
  

> + TiDB may automatically convert invalid values or values beyond the supported range to a zero value of that type. This behavior is dependent on the SQL Mode set. For example,

Reviewer 3: Use "might" instead of "may", because "may" has multiple meanings.

>   ```sql

Reviewer 3: ditto

+ By default, TiDB enables the SQL mode `NO_ZERO_DATE`. This mode prevents storing zero values such as '0000-00-00'.

Different types of zero value are shown in the following table:

| Date Type | "Zero" Value |
| :------   |  :----       |
| DATE      | '0000-00-00' |
| TIME      | '00:00:00'   |
| DATETIME  | '0000-00-00 00:00:00' |
| TIMESTAMP | '0000-00-00 00:00:00' |
| YEAR      | 0000         |

## `DATE`, `DATETIME` and `TIMESTAMP` types

`DATE`, `DATETIME`, `TIMESTAMP` are three distinct data types. This section describes both common points and differences among these types. 

`DATE` only contains date-portion and no time-portion. TiDB accepts and shows the values of `DATE` type in 'YYYY-MM-DD' format. The acceptable values range from '1000-01-01' to '9999-12-31'.

`DATETIME` contains both date-portion and time-portion, and the format is 'YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS'. The acceptable values range from '1000-01-01 00:00:00' to '9999-12-31 23:59:59'.

> `TIMESTAMP` contains both date-portion and time-portion. Its values range from '1970-01-01 00:00:01' to '2038-01-19 03:14:07' in UTC time.

Reviewer 3: For the above three paras, it would be better if we use a bulleted list.

For any column with `TIMESTAMP` or `DATETIME` value type in the table, you can set the default or auto-update value as current timestamp. 

These properties can be set by setting `DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` and `ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP` when the column is being defined. DEFAULT can also be set as a specific value, such as `DEFAULT 0` or `DEFAULT '2000-01-01 00:00:00'`.

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
  ts TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
  dt DATETIME DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP
);
```

The default value for `DATETIME` is `NULL` unless it is specified as `NOT NULL`. For the latter situation, if no default value is set, the default value is be 0.

```sql
CREATE TABLE t1 (
  dt1 DATETIME ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,         -- default NULL
  dt2 DATETIME NOT NULL ON UPDATE CURRENT_TIMESTAMP -- default 0
);
```

## Decimal part of time value

A decimal part is permitted for `TIME`, `DATETIME`, `TIMESTAMP` types. The decimal can be accurate to milliseconds.

+ Use `type_name(fsp)` to define a column that supports fractional precision, where `type_name` can be `TIME`, `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP`. For example,

>   ```sql

Reviewer 3: Indentation

  CREATE TABLE t1 (t TIME(3), dt DATETIME(6));
  ```

>   fsp must range from 0 to 6. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    `fsp` must range from 0 to 6. 
```

>   0 means there is no fractional part. If fsp is omitted, the default is 0.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    `0` means there is no fractional part. If `fsp` is omitted, the default value is 0.
```

+ When inserting `TIME`, `DATETIME` or `TIMESTAMP` which contain a fractional part, if the number of digit of the fraction is too few, or too many, rounding may be needed in the situation. For example,

>   ```sql

Reviewer 3: ditto

  +---------------------+----------------+--------------------+
  | 2012-08-15 09:28:00 | 20120815092800 | 20120815092800.889 |
  +---------------------+----------------+--------------------+
  ```
  
+ TiDB may automatically convert invalid values or values beyond the supported range to a zero value of that type. This behavior is dependent on the SQL Mode set. For example,

  ```sql
  mysql> set @@sql_mode = '';                               
  Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

  mysql> show create table t1;
  +-------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | Table | Create Table                                                                                            |
  +-------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  | t1    | CREATE TABLE `t1` (
    `a` time DEFAULT NULL
  ) ENGINE=InnoDB DEFAULT CHARSET=utf8mb4 COLLATE=utf8mb4_bin |
  +-------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
  1 row in set (0.00 sec)
  

>   mysql> insert into t1 values ('2090-11-32:22:33:44');

Reviewer 2: Can we move the show create table above the `set sql_mode`, and then add the same insert with the default sql mode too?  I think that makes for a more interesting example because it contrasts the two behaviors.
